There we go.
Okay, we're talking to Eric Craft here.
Congratulations on yet another.
Thank you.
We've done this now about four times, haven't we?
I think so.
It's not easy coming up with a new angle, but I'll tell you.
Well, let me just pour this martini, Nick, before we get there.
There we go.
All right, now I've got that.
Have you got yours?
It's a little early.
You're kidding me, right?
I am.
I thought we should try to put this interview in the same context.
Well, they usually do flow a little better, don't they, under those circumstances.
I guess what I'm looking for here, and for reasons that I'll explain as we go along, I'm really looking for a Long Island ambiance.
Oh, yeah.
And maybe you can tell me about your little world down there.
Just talk, okay, and if there's something...
I want to direct you.
I mean, we've got the book, obviously, so I'm not going to question you specifically about the book.
But just talk a little bit about Long Island and this world.
I will.
And, you know, that reminds me of something that I'm going to tell you now so that I don't forget to tell you later.
A contact for you here as a source of ideas for other people that you might want to interview for Hampson's Magazine, for instance.
is Kaneo Pavone or Pavone.
I'm not quite sure how his last name is pronounced.
P-A-V-O-N.
Are you sure it's not Carmine?
No.
He is the owner of Kaneo's book.
What's the name of it again?
Kaneo's book.
C-O-N?
I-O apostrophe S. Okay.
in Sag Harbor.
It's a bookshop, very literary, and a magnet for the whole literary community out here.
Okay, good.
The address is Post Office Box 1962, Sag Harbor, New York, 11963.
Okay.
And the number is 516-725-
And give me Konyo's last name again.
Pavone, P-A-V-O-N-E.
Okay.
And everyone calls him Konyo.
Konyo.
C-A-N-I-O, C-A-N-I-O, C-A-N-I-O.
He kind of says C-A-N-I-O.
It reads C-A-N-I-O, but we call him C-A-N-I-O, like the con of a ship.
Okay, that's good.
He's a delightful guy, and if there is anybody who sort of knows everybody in the literary community, it's Satan.
Well, they're looking for me for a list of ideas.
I'm going to do one slam-bang opener.
It's about 98% I'll be writing for them this summer.
Chris, I really got to pitch local ideas.
I think it will work out real well.
Yeah.
But anyway, let's talk.
Go ahead.
Talk about your world down there, your fictional world, and wherever you want to take it, okay?
Okay.
This may take a couple of phone interviews, by the way.
That's fine.
The real world, first of all, is just idyllic.
I am sitting here in my workroom now,
at the computer screen, and if I raise my eyes above the screen, I look out through two enormous windows in the open upper part of our living room at Three Mile Harbor, which is a bay, really.
There are no boats in it now, but I'm looking across town land.
Just dunes and trees and beach grass at the empty harbor.
And it's still kind of cold and bare.
Later on in the summer, they're both bobbing at their moorings.
Are you native to this area?
No.
I grew up in Babylon.
It's on the south shore of Long Island, on the Great South Bay, about halfway out from New York City.
Well, you're native to Long Island.
Long Island, yes.
But this is another world.
Okay.
Well, that's a good quote.
This East Hampton, the Hamptons area, the whole East End, have a kind of combined feeling about them.
There's a strong element of New England.
here, that there is not on the rest of the island, which EastEnders refer to as Up Island.
And yet there is some of the Long Island feeling too, and so it isn't quite an outpost of New England any longer, although it originally was established as a
stopping off point for whalers and the
One of the local high school teams still calls themselves the Whalers.
Well, you know, the counties are... They want to examine the political correctness.
Well, you know, going back on the names of counties, Dukes is Martha's Vineyard.
Dukes, Duchess, Kings, and, you know, they were all part of the original scheme.
Right.
Yeah.
Before there were states.
Right.
But go ahead.
And so, now...
In fact, just having been back in the New England area, again, we, returning here, saw how much of a mixture this is, that there is an almost indefinable element of New England life that you see manifested in so many things, partly in architecture, architecture,
a little bit in the speech patterns and accents of people from families that have been established here for a long time.
And yet there is a kind of go-go rush and breathlessness about the area.
That is certainly all New York.
Okay, but now when you conceived of this world, Peter Leroy's world, you were living up here, right?
Right.
And tell me a little bit about, this was the Long Island of your youth, certainly, that was influencing your creative processes here.
And now you've returned to it.
Right.
And maybe you can talk a little bit about that.
Certainly, the world that I found myself creating started with what I remembered.
And I have used the streets and little byways of Babylon, especially the area where my grandparents lived, both sets of grandparents, as the map.
of Babington, or at least I did to start.
And, you know, it may have been a touch of homesickness when I was in college that first got me thinking about reconstructing a childhood.
But as Peter Leroy began to become an individual and a more fully realized character,
So the town of Babington became something quite different from Babylon.
Maybe I was only blind to it, but I would say that when I look back only with my memory and not with my imagination, I don't recall that the citizens of Babylon were as eccentric a bunch as the citizens of Babington.
Now, maybe I just didn't know, but I...
There is, of course, the fact that I am in control of the town of Babington, and so in a sense responsible for all of our citizens, and I'm careful of them.
But how tight a rein do you hold on what they do, on the way they live their lives?
Yeah, they're a willful bunch.
I find, just as Peter finds, that he may give them a nudge and set them in motion, but they are inclined to divigate, to wander from the path that he might set them on, and to take unpredicted turnings.
That certainly is true for me, too.
Okay.
Tell me about the creation of the new character.
Let's tie in the current book.
We'll jump around a little bit.
Yeah, that's fine.
Ariane has been a part of the story for quite a while now.
Actually, she originated as I built a family around her youngest brother.
Her youngest brother, Rodney,
who is known as Rascal, short for Raskolnikov, his nickname, came along.
He's one of those characters who kind of wandered into the story the way Dudley Beaker did, the fellow who lives next door to Peter's maternal grandparents.
Peter had other friends.
Certainly.
But Rascal came along as a kind of rogue, sort of boy outlaw, not in the sense that he was an evil character, but that he was a little beyond adult control.
And this was...
Very attractive for Peter.
The way it is for a lot of kids, I think, you know, the idea of an older, more capable friend who may get you into a little trouble if you don't watch out.
So it was in thinking about him and developing him as a character that I began building his family around him.
Now, these people are based on absolutely no one.
Mm-hmm.
As is the case in the affection that Peter feels for his grandparents, the friendship, the camaraderie that Peter and Rascal share is based on the kind of friendships I had with kids when I was Peter's age.
But Rascal's not based on any person from my past.
However, I have a friend of longstanding who became my friend
later in life than Peter has befriended Rascal, but roughly in junior high school or so, who is absolutely certain that he's Rascal.
So certain that he has begun to appropriate some of the anecdotes from the books as memories from his own life.
It's not merely a case of life imitating art, but of sort of life borrowing from art to reconstruct itself.
But Ariane was at first just part of the background that when I imagined the Lodkuchnikov family, there they were in that rickety house
on the banks of the estuarial stretch of the Bellotomy with the stench of the tidal flats whenever the tide was out.
And I could see them gathering there, and they were around on the periphery of the dining room, say, as they were coming in for dinner.
And there were the mother and father very clearly.
And those two lugs, the witless brothers, the two Ernie's,
And then kind of the last one to come to the dinner table wearing a slip was Ariane.
And she seemed to sleep a lot and she seemed just terribly seductive to 10-year-old Peter, which he was, that's how old he was when he first encountered her.
I think I knew from the first time
that I saw that she was part of that family, that eventually she was going to have to have a book of her own.
How many books are there now in this cycle altogether, would you say?
There are five hardcover books.
And one of those, Little Follies, of course, is a collection of nine novellas.
So it's been going on for a while.
And you began this when?
Yeah.
We're covering stuff we covered before.
Yes, that's okay.
This depends on, like, not where do you stop, but where do you start.
I really did get the idea one cold winter's day back in, so it would have been 1962 when I was a sophomore.
Oh, wait, no.
I started at Harvard in June of 61.
Yeah.
No, I was still a freshman then, so it would have been 63.
the winter of 63, January or February of 63.
And the first self-publication of the whole saga started in 1976.
And then the first paperback novella was published in 1982.
First hardcover book, which was Herb and Lorna, 1988.
That was basically the breakthrough, would you say?
Yes, to a larger audience and more conventional publishing.
That got quite a bit of press, I think.
Do you, by the way, have a nice fat press kit that I can get?
Sure.
um with you know and don't be stingy with the stories i mean i like as much i had this all once upon a time and since i moved out of the newspaper here to my own office at home you know a lot of things have been have been lost along the way i will need at least a half a dozen pictures of you by the way okay i just got the toledo blade this week oh great
Can you believe it?
200,000 circulation.
Oh, wonderful.
And they're taking me every week.
Anyway, go ahead.
I'm sorry.
You know, if you don't mind pausing just for a minute, give me the list of papers.
Okay, go ahead.
Start that again, Eric.
About a year from now, in the early spring of 1995, all of my books will come out in paperback in uniform editions.
as the spring list of Picador, a new imprint of Macmillan.
It's an imprint of Macmillan UK now, but they're going to launch it here in the fall of this year with a mixed fiction list.
And then the spring list will be the complete works of craft.
That's great.
That's terrific.
Isn't it?
Yeah.
Now, when you started this out of your home,
You developed, you built this strong following, which, you know, to use that buzzword, the cult following, with the hope that you would break through to the wider audience, I guess.
No.
Not really?
I have to say that, of course, I was looking for publications in some form.
But, you know, I...
I enjoyed the newsletter publication so much that I honestly stopped looking for something else.
If financial difficulty hadn't made it impossible for me to continue publishing the newsletters at one point, I don't think I would have gone looking for a publisher other than myself.
I was happy as my own publisher.
I found myself easy to get along with.
Were you able to live off it?
No, not at all.
In the eyes of the IRS, it was never anything more than a hobby.
Tell me.
My little thing is a business too, which is fun.
I'm just finishing my text today.
It's kind of comical in a way.
Go ahead.
So, you know, it's all for the best that it moved on into more conventional publishing.
But it was a very interesting way to develop the work, and I certainly enjoyed it.
Well, are you writing it differently now, in your view?
Yes, I think so.
In this sense, that the pieces are so much larger.
I've always had the very strong awareness of form, that whatever...
bit of the entire work I sent out at any one time, and I still think of myself as sending these books out to my readers, I have wanted it to be clearly a unified, complete chunk.
Even though it's part of a much larger work, I really...
want that closure for each one.
And now that I'm working in long form, it's an opportunity to make each one much richer, of course.
There's just so much more I can do in the space that I've given myself now.
But it's also a...
There's a delayed gratification factor or delayed communication factor.
The fact that I send something to my readers so much less frequently than I used to is a little, well, it requires a different kind of discipline and a kind of self-confidence that
I certainly didn't have back when I was sending out the newsletters.
I don't think that I could have sustained the effort of writing and writing, rewriting, editing a whole thing for such a long period without that contact with the readers.
Do you have a specific reader in mind?
I mean, do you visualize?
I'm sorry?
Madeline.
Most definitely.
Uh-huh.
my my first reader uh and um in many senses my uh only reader you know i didn't i i i shouldn't say it that way no i just mean that uh the reader who counts right yeah but you see you see a you see a face when you're writing though is what i guess i'm saying too well you know i see a lot of them now i um
Having met so many of my readers, I do have a sense of a sort of community of readers in my work.
And I know from feedback the ways in which people get it, see the large design.
People who have been with me for some time now, I think, really have a sense of what I'm building.
and not just of the bricks that are going into it, you know?
Do these readers, do they ever express dissatisfaction the way certain things go?
I mean, maybe they aren't going the way they want them to go?
Right, they do.
The flip side of that is pleasure at the way things are going too.
Two things have happened as the work has grown and as time has passed and as the readership has grown that the work has become so much larger and more diverse than it was.
At least the evidence of its diversity is there now.
And the readership at the same time has become so much larger and more diverse that there are people who, well, all readers, I suppose, have parts of the work that they are particularly fond of or that resonate for them in a particular way.
And...
We, as people, like to have more of what we like and less of what we don't like as much.
And so as I follow the questions that are leading me into all the little nooks and crannies of this work, the what's happening in that house in Babington now, what's this character up to, what's going to become of so-and-so, and as I pursue all of those and for such a diverse readership,
it is more and more often the case that people say, oh, I wish you'd give me more about Peter's childhood, or I want more about the grandparents, you know, instead of what you currently happen to be doing.
So this is an interesting consequence for me of having a larger readership, that there are more people with their own ideas of what the work should become.
You know, I just spent...
time at Harvard and at the Governor Dummer Academy and talking with students and listening to their questions on two different age levels, but really not terribly different levels of perception and interest.
The most frequent type of question is a question about
What's going to become of so-and-so?
Where will so-and-so go?
And you just find that people either identify with the character or find that they're annoyed by a character in some cases and want, as a result, to know what's going to happen to that character.
And they want the narrative to follow
that character or have that character be dominant, at least in the next chunk of the overall work.
And I can't do that for all of them.
Sure.
You have, I mean, this is a corpus for you, obviously.
This is a full body of work.
Right.
And I guess it goes on as long as you go on.
That's about, is that?
Yes, it is.
We will be coterminous.
And, I mean, there's growth here with you, is that correct?
I certainly hope so.
I mean, in terms of the characters and developments.
Yeah.
Do you see these characters?
I mean, this is a cliché question, but nevertheless, I mean, they're real for you, obviously.
Yes, they certainly are.
And you care as much about their welfare as the readers do, I'm sure.
I do.
You know, I try to be kind to them.
I really, I would save all my characters if I could.
But they have a habit of getting, well, some of them, not all of them, but many of them have a habit of getting themselves into bad situations.
And just fate or accident puts them into bad situations.
This is the case with Arianne.
that Peter, having imagined this woman after all, would have imagined for her as well an ideal life of some kind.
And because he is running around trying to move his little play characters throughout his entire world, it is unavoidable.
that there should be occasions when things go badly.
And it broke his heart when Ariane came to a bad end.
So he had to go in there and try to fix things for her.
And that's why he gives her this gift of a second chance at life, at least in his books.
When you're writing these, what do you want people to take out of the books?
I mean, is it entertainment fundamentally?
I think it's... Now, I have to explore this question with you a little, Nick, because as I've thought about the real answer to this question, you know, I think you're the first person to ask me this.
But I've thought about that because when I first started writing, when I first started attempting to write, one of the struggles I had was that I couldn't imagine why I was being so arrogant as to think that I had something worth saying to myself.
a lot of people I didn't know yet, or to people I did, friends who might read, that was worth their taking the time to read it.
And, you know, I worked in silence, you know, without showing things to anyone for a decade, because I had to find
what it was that I had to say and to bring it to a point where I could say, yes, this is worth saying, first of all, and it is worth the reading, second.
It still sounds arrogant to me to say that, but I have discovered that there is a way in which I can say, well, here is something about my books that I'm not...
that I'm not embarrassed to claim for them.
And here's what it is.
That I think that I provide a fine place to think and imagine along with me.
I really think that the reader and I are in this together and that I've made this
place this Babington I've let it mirror reality in some ways and I've let it suggest an alternative reality in other ways and I think that they are provocative ways I think they are ways that like a move on a chess board although I don't quite like that game analogy because it sounds as if the reader and I are in competition more as if we were say bridge partners
playing against somebody else, that we work together.
Peter says in several places that one of the things he's always liked about the books that he likes is that they have room in them for his mind to wander.
And I think I have provided that room and furnished it well with interesting collectibles and
pieces of junk and anything that might provoke the imagination the readers memory readers response so that I think my books are very active reads and the reader that I like and the reader who likes my work I think is somebody with a good mind a good imagination
who is happy to participate in this.
Great.
I'm glad I asked the question.
Yeah.
That's a great quote.
I'm going to knock it off now.
Okay.
Because I've got a tape here and I want to transcribe it and assess it.
Now, big thing, can you arrange to get me a kit sent from Hillary or whatever?
Yeah, I'll fax her immediately.
And, you know, tell her.
Six pictures.
Yeah, but I really want as much press stuff going back even.
Oh, so like copies of reviews?
Sure.